src/plc/fp/Poly.lagda.md, before:

---
title     : "Poly: Generic data structures and functions"
layout    : page
prev      : /NatData/
permalink : /Poly/
next      : /Functional/
---

```
module plc.fp.Poly where
open import Data.Bool
open import Data.Nat
open import Data.Char
open import Data.String

import Relation.Binary.PropositionalEquality as Eq
open Eq using (_≡_; refl)
```

## Polymorphic lists

In the last section, we worked with lists containing just numbers.
Obviously, interesting programs also need to be able to manipulate
lists with elements from other types — lists of booleans, lists of
lists, etc.  We _could_ just define a new inductive datatype for each
of these, for example

```
data BoolList : Set where
  []bool : BoolList
  _∷bool_ : Bool → BoolList → BoolList
```

But this would quickly become tedious, partly because we have to make
up different constructor names for each datatype, but mostly because
we would also need to define new versions of all our list manipulating
functions (`length`, `rev`, etc.) for each new datatype definition.

To avoid all this repetition, Agda supports _polymorphic_ inductive
type definitions.  Single-type lists like `NatList` or `BoolList` are
*monomorphic*, literally meaning that they have one form.  A
polyporphic datatype can be applied to different elements types — it
has *many* forms, not just one.  For example, here is a first version
of a _polymorphic list_ datatype.

```
module Poly1 where
  data List : Set → Set where
    [] : (x : Set) → List x
    cons : (x : Set) → x → List x → List x
```

This is just like the definition of `NatList` from the previous
chapter, except that the `ℕ` argument to the cons constructor has
been replaced by an arbitrary type `x`, a binding for `x` has been
added to the function header on the first line, and the occurrences of
`NatList` in the types of the constructors have been replaced by `List x`.

We will improve this datatype shortly, so we have wrapped this first
draft in its own local `module` declaration.  This way, we can reuse
the same names in other modules, and avoid having to write
`++version2` or similar silliness.

What sort of thing is `List` itself?  A good way to think about it is
that the definition of `List` is a _function_ from one datatype to
another, inductively-defined datatype.  In other words, `List` is a
function from one type to another.  For any particular type `x`, the
type `List x` is the inductively defined set of lists whose elements
are of type `x`.

#### Exercise `typelist1` (starting) {#typelist1}

Use `C-c C-d` to verify that `List` (or since we have defined it
within a local module, `Poly1.List`) has type `Set → Set`.

The parameter `x` in this version of `List` automatically becomes a
parameter to the constructors `[]` and `cons` — that is, `[]` and
`cons` are now polymorphic constructors; when we use them, we must now
provide a first argument that is the type of the List they are
building. For example, `[] ℕ` constructs the empty List of type
`ℕ`.

#### Exercise `typenil1` (starting) {#typenil1}

Use `C-c C-d` to verify that

 - `Poly1.[] ℕ` has type `Poly1.List ℕ`.
 - `Poly1.cons ℕ 3 (Poly1.[] ℕ)` has type `Poly1.List ℕ`.

### Quantification for type arguments

In our first version of polymorphic lists, the type of the elements of
the list was an argument to both the type name `List`, and to its two
constructors.  It is more common to structure generic types to use
*quantification* for the type argument in the constructors:

```
data List : Set → Set where
  [] : ∀ {A : Set} → List A
  _∷_ : ∀ {A : Set} → A → List A → List A

infixr 5 _∷_
```

The symbol ∀ is pronounced "for all."  There is a sense in which these
constructors are equivalent to our earlier ones, but there are
advantages to using quantification for constructors and functions.  In
particular, we are asking Agda to infer the arguments of a type
automatically by writing them in curly braces `{` and `}` instead of
parentheses `(` and `)`.

For both of these constructors, `A` becomes an *implicit* type
argument.  Now when we write a list of natural numbers, we do not need
to write the type argument with every name use.  For example, you can
use `C-c C-d` to check that

    1 ∷ 2 ∷ 3 ∷ []

is a well-typed expression, with type `List ℕ`.

What is the type of `[]`?  `C-c C-d` gives us a cryptic result:

    List _x_17

(Your system may show you a different number than 17 — which is fine.)
Clearly, and unsurprisingly, it is a `List`.  But what is this type
`_x_17` for the elements?  We have asked Agda to work out the element
type for `[]` itself, but when we describe the empty list there are no
elements from which Agda can work out the right type!  So Agda uses
`_x_17` as a placeholder, unless and until a particular use allows it
to figure out a more specific type.

But we can be more specific about the element type if we want for this
empty list.  We can pass an *explicit* type to `[]` or `_∷_` by
enclosing the type argment is curly braces.  So

 - `[] {ℕ}` has the type `List ℕ`
 - `[] {Bool}` has the type `List Bool`

even though there are no other elements of the list to require these
specific element types.

Note that although our construction of `List` does allow lists with
different element types, for any single list the element type **must
be consistent**.  We can describe a list of numbers, a list of boolean
values, a list of pairs where each pair contains one number and one
boolean.  But we **cannot** describe a list which contains both
numbers and booleans.  If we try, Agda gives us an error.  For
example, we get an error if we evaluate or typecheck this expression:

    1 ∷ true ∷ []

The type of `_∷_` states that its left element has the same type as
the elements of the list it should expect for its right element.  So
when Agda sees a list which begins

    1 ∷

since `1` has type `ℕ`, Agda expects that the expression which follows
the `∷` should have type `List ℕ`.  But `true ∷ []` does not have
this type, and the evaluator reports an error.

Including the pragma:

    {-# BUILTIN LIST List #-}

tells Agda that the type `List` corresponds to the Haskell type
list, and the constructors `[]` and `_∷_` correspond to nil and
cons respectively, allowing a more efficient representation of lists.

The following defiition of `List` is equivalent to the one above:

    data List (x : Set) : Set where
      [] : List x
      _∷_ : x → List x → List x

When we move the argument declaration `(x : Set)` to the left side of
the colon `:`, Agda knows that it should be implicitly quantified for
each of the constructors.

### Polymorphic list functions

We can now define polymorphic versions of the functions we've already
seen for `NatList`.  Like the constructors for polymorphic `List`,
each of these functions will be quantified over the type of the
elements of the list.

Our monomorphic version of the `repeat` function took a **number** `n`
and a `count` of how many times `n` should be repeated in the result
list.  In our polymorphic version, we quantify over an element type
`x`, and the first explicit value argument of `repeat` is some value
of type `x`:

```
repeat : ∀ {x : Set} → x → ℕ → List x
repeat _ 0 = []
repeat x (suc n) = x ∷ repeat x n

_ : repeat 5 2 ≡ 5 ∷ 5 ∷ []
_ = refl

_ : repeat true 4 ≡ true ∷ true ∷ true ∷ true ∷ []
_ = refl
```

As with `[]` we can make the type argument explicit if we wish:

    repeat {ℕ} 5 2
    repeat {Bool} true 4

but we must use the curly braces to make the implicit argument
explicit, and we must make sure that the type and value arguments are
all consistent together.

You should try to find a balance in your own code between too many
type annotations (which can clutter and distract) and too few (which
can sometimes require readers to perform complex type inference in
their heads in order to understand your code).

#### Exercise `mumblegrumble` (starting) {#mumblegrumble}

Consider the following two inductively defined types.

```
module MumbleGrumble where

  data mumble : Set where
    a : mumble
    b : mumble → ℕ → mumble
    c : mumble

  data grumble : Set → Set where
    d : ∀ {x : Set} → mumble → grumble x
    e : ∀ {x : Set} → grumble x
```

Which of the following are well-typed elements of `grumble x` for some
type `x`?  Try to answer without using `C-c C-d` or `C-c C-l` before
checking your answer.

 - `d (b a 5)`
 - `d mumble (b a 5)`
 - `d bool (b a 5)`
 - `e bool true`
 - `e mumble (b c 0)`
 - `e bool (b c 0)`
 - `c`

#### Exercise `polyListTypes` (practice) {#polyListTypes}

Which of these expressions are well-typed?  What type do those
expressions have?  Why are the ill-typed expression not well-typed?

    'a' ∷ 'b' ∷ 'c'
    1 ∷ 'b' ∷ false ∷ []
    'a' ∷ 'b' ∷ 'c' ∷ []
    'a' ∷ 'b' ∷ 'c' ∷ 1

#### Exercise `genericlength` (practice) {#genericlength}

Write a polymorphic version of `length`:

    length : ∀ {x} → List x → ℕ
    -- Your clauses go here

    _ : length (true ∷ []) ≡ 1
    _ = refl

    _ : length (2 ∷ 4 ∷ 6 ∷ []) ≡ 3
    _ = refl

#### Exercise `genericappend` (practice) {#genericappend}

Write a polymorphic function `_++_` for appending two lists:

    infixr 5 _++_
    _++_ : ∀ {x : Set} → List x → List x → List x
    -- Your clauses go here

    _ : [] ++ (1 ∷ []) ≡ 1 ∷ []
    _ = refl

    _ : (2 ∷ 4 ∷ 6 ∷ []) ++ (8 ∷ 10 ∷ []) ≡ (2 ∷ 4 ∷ 6 ∷ 8 ∷ 10 ∷ [])
    _ = refl

#### Exercise `genericreverse` (practice) {#genericreverse}

    reverse : ∀ (x : Set) → List x → List x
    -- Your clauses go here

    _ : rev (1 ∷ []) ≡ 1 ∷ []
    _ = refl

    _ : rev (10 ∷ 20 ∷ 30 ∷ []) ≡ (30 ∷ 20 ∷ 10 ∷ [])
    _ = refl

#### Strings as lists of characters

The `Data.String` module in the standard library defines two functions
`toList` and `fromList` which allow a string to be converted to or
from a list of characters.  These exercises ask you to use these
functions, together with operations on the resulting lists.  For some
if these exercises, the character-manipulating functions of module
`Data.Char` will be helpful.

##### Exercise `capitalize` (practice) {#capitalize}

Write a function `capitalize` which converts all lower-case letters in
its argument to upper-case letters, and leaves other characters
unchanged.

    capitalize : String → String
    capitalize s = ?

    _ : capitalize "" ≡ ""
    _ = refl

    _ : capitalize "hello3" ≡ "HELLO3"
    _ = refl
 
##### Exercise `capitalizeOnly` (practice) {#capitalizeOnly}

Write a function `capitalizeOnly` which converts all lower-case
letters in its argument to upper-case letters, leaves upper-case
letters alone, and removes other characters from the result.

    capitalizeOnly : String → String
    capitalizeOnly s = ?

    _ : capitalizeOnly "" ≡ ""
    _ = refl

    _ : capitalizeOnly "hello3" ≡ "HELLO"
    _ = refl

##### Exercise `mangle` (practice) {#mangle}

Write a function `mangle` whose result removes the first character of
a word, and attaches it at the end.  If the argument is empty,
`mangle` should simply return an empty string.

    mangle : String → String
    mangle s = ?

    _ : mangle "" ≡ ""
    _ = refl

    _ : mangle "B" ≡ "B"
    _ = refl

    _ : mangle "ok" ≡ "ko"
    _ = refl

    _ : mangle "hello" ≡ "elloh"
    _ = refl

#### Exercise `matches` (practice) {#matches}

Write a function `matches` which takes two arguments,

 - A number, and
 - A list of numbers

and removes all occurrences of its first argument from its second
argument.

    matches : String → String
    matches s = ?

    _ : matches 10 (1 ∷ 10 ∷ 2 ∷ 10 ∷ 3 ∷ 10 ∷ 4 ∷ []) ≡ 1 ∷ 2 ∷ 3 ∷ 4 ∷ []
    _ = refl

    _ : matches 6 [] ≡ []
    _ = refl

    _ : matches 5 (20 ∷ 21 ∷ 22 ∷ []) ≡ 20 ∷ 21 ∷ 22 ∷ []
    _ = refl

## Polymorphic pairs

Following the same pattern, the definition for pairs of numbers that
we gave in the last chapter can be generalized to _polymorphic pairs_,
often called _products_.

```
data Prod (A B : Set) : Set where
  pair : A → B → Prod A B
```

As with lists, we make the type arguments of the constructor implicit
and define the familiar concrete notation.  Where our `List` type
takes only a single type argument, `Prod` takes two type arguments
which in the definition we name `A` and `B`.  Unlike with a list, the
left- and right-hand elements of a pair do not need to be of the same
type.  For example, we could have a pair of one natural number and one
boolean value.

```
twentyTwoTrue : Prod ℕ Bool
twentyTwoTrue = pair 22 true
```

It is straightforward to adapt the functions for extracting the pair
components:

```
fst : ∀ {A B : Set} → Prod A B → A
fst (pair x y) = x

snd : ∀ {A B : Set} → Prod A B → B
snd (pair x y) = y
```

We can also adapt our function for swapping the two elements of a
pair, but note that the swap must now be reflected in the types of the
argument and result.

```
swapPair : ∀ {A B : Set} → Prod A B → Prod B A
swapPair (pair x y) = pair y x
```

#### Exercise `explaincombine` (practice) {#explaincombine}

What does this function do?  Write tests for distinct key cases of its
behavior.

```
combine :  ∀ {A B : Set} → List A → List B → List (Prod A B)
combine [] _ = []
combine _ [] = []
combine (x ∷ xs) (y ∷ ys) = pair x y ∷ combine xs ys
```

#### Exercise `split` (practice) {#split}

The function `split` is the right inverse of `combine`: it takes a
List of pairs and returns a pair of lists.  In many functional
languages, it is called `unzip`.  Fill in the definition of `split`
below.  Make sure it passes the given test.

    split : ∀ {A B : Set} → List (Prod A B) → Prod (List A) (List B)
    -- Your clauses go here

    _ : split ((pair 1 false) ∷ (pair 2 false) ∷ [])
          ≡ pair (1 ∷ 2 ∷ []) (false ∷ false ∷ [])
    _ = refl

#### Exercise `typesFunctions` (practice) {#typesFunctions}

Write Agda definitions which have the following types:

 - `List (Pair ℕ)`
 - `ℕ → ℕ → Bool → ℕ`
 - `Char → Pair Char Char`

#### Exercise `splitList` (practice) {#splitList}

A different notion of splitting is to just cut a list into two parts.
Write a function `splitList` which takes a number and a list, and
returns a pair of lists.  Appending the two elements of the pair
should return the original list, and the first list of the pair should
have length equal to the number argument.  If the number argument is
larger than the length of the list argument, then the first element of
the pair should be the original list, and the second element should be
empty.

    splitList : ∀ {E : Set} → ℕ → List E → Prod (List E) (List E)
    -- Your definition goes here

    _ : splitList 1 (1 ∷ 2 ∷ 3 ∷ 1 ∷ []) ≡ pair (1 ∷ []) (2 ∷ 3 ∷ 1 ∷ [])
    _ = refl

    _ : splitList 3 (1 ∷ 2 ∷ 3 ∷ 1 ∷ []) ≡ pair (1 ∷ 2 ∷ 3 ∷ []) (1 ∷ [])
    _ = refl

    _ : splitList 0 (1 ∷ 2 ∷ 3 ∷ 1 ∷ []) ≡ pair [] (1 ∷ 2 ∷ 3 ∷ 1 ∷ [])
    _ = refl

    _ : splitList 9 (1 ∷ 2 ∷ 3 ∷ 1 ∷ []) ≡ pair (1 ∷ 2 ∷ 3 ∷ 1 ∷ []) []
    _ = refl

    _ : splitList 3 [] ≡ pair [] []
    _ = refl

#### Exercise `lengthEncode` (practice) {#lengthEncode}

Write a function `lengthEncode` which converts a string into a list of
pairs, each pair having a character and a number.  The series of
characters should be the same as the characters of the string, but
with consecutive duplicates removed.  The number should be the length
of that substring of that character only.

    lengthEncode : String → List (Prod Char ℕ)
    -- Your definition goes here

    _ : lengthEncode "hello" = (pair 'h' 1) ∷ (pair 'e' 1) :: (pair 'l' 2) ∷ (pair 'o' 1) ∷ []
    _ = refl

#### Exercise `lengthDecode` (practice) {#lengthDecode}

Write a function `lengthDecode` which is the inverse of
`lengthEncode`.

    lengthDecode : List (Prod Char ℕ) → String
    -- Your definition goes here

    _ : lengthDecode (pair 'h' 1) ∷ (pair 'e' 1) :: (pair 'l' 2) ∷ (pair 'o' 1) ∷ [] = "hello"
    _ = refl

## Polymorphic options

Our third polymorphic type generalizes the `NatMaybe` type into a
wrapper for either zero or one values of an element type.

```
data Maybe (A : Set) : Set where
  nothing : Maybe A
  just : A → Maybe A
```

We can now rewrite the `nthError` function so that it works with any
type of lists.

```
nthError : ∀ {X : Set} → List X → ℕ → Maybe X
nthError [] _ = nothing
nthError (x ∷ _) 0 = just x
nthError (x ∷ xs) (suc n) = nthError xs n

_ : nthError (4 ∷ 5 ∷ 6 ∷ 7 ∷ []) 0 ≡ just 4
_ = refl

_ : nthError (1 ∷ 2 ∷ []) 1 ≡ just 2
_ = refl

_ : nthError (1 ∷ 2 ∷ []) 2 ≡ nothing
_ = refl

_ : nthError ([] {ℕ}) 0 ≡ nothing
_ = refl
```

#### Exercise `hdErrorPoly` (practice) {#hdErrorPoly}

Complete the definition of a polymorphic version of the `hdError`
function making sure as usual that it passes its tests.

    hdError : ∀ {X : Type} → List X → Maybe X
    -- Your definition goes here

    _ : hdError (1 ∷ 2 ∷ []) = just 1
    _ = refl

    _ : hdError [] = nothing
    _ = refl

#### Exercise `lastItem` (practice) {#lastItem}

Write a function `lastItem` which returns the last element of a list,
if one exists.

    lastItem : ∀ {X : Type} → List X → Maybe X
    -- Your definition goes here

    _ : lastItem (10 ∷ 9 ∷ 8 ∷ []) = just 8
    _ = refl

    _ : lastItem (1 ∷ 2 ∷ []) = just 2
    _ = refl

    _ : lastItem [] = nothing
    _ = refl

#### Exercise `lastButOne` (practice) {#lastButOne}

Write a function `lastButOne` which returns the last element of a list,
if one exists.

    lastButOne : ∀ {X : Type} → List X → Maybe X
    -- Your definition goes here

    _ : lastButOne (11 ∷ 10 ∷ 9 ∷ 8 ∷ []) = just 9
    _ = refl

    _ : lastButOne (1 ∷ 2 ∷ []) = just 1
    _ = refl

    _ : lastButOne (1 ∷ []) = nothing
    _ = refl

    _ : lastButOne [] = nothing
    _ = refl

## Unicode

This section uses the following Unicode symbols:

    →  U+2192  RIGHTWARDS ARROW (\to, \r, \->)
    ∀  U+2200  FOR ALL  (\all)
    ∷  U+2237  PROPORTION  (\::)
    ≡  U+2261  IDENTICAL TO (\==)

---

*This page is derived from Pierce et al.  Exercises ##### Exercise
`capitalize`, `capitalizeOnly`, and `matches` are adapted from
Thompson.  For more information see the
[sources and authorship]({{ site.baseurl }}/Sources/) page.*

Commit message:

Straighten out chapter vs. section

src/plc/fp/Poly.lagda.md, after:

---
title     : "Poly: Generic data structures and functions"
layout    : page
prev      : /NatData/
permalink : /Poly/
next      : /Functional/
---

```
module plc.fp.Poly where
open import Data.Bool
open import Data.Nat
open import Data.Char
open import Data.String

import Relation.Binary.PropositionalEquality as Eq
open Eq using (_≡_; refl)
```

## Polymorphic lists

In the last section, we worked with lists containing just numbers.
Obviously, interesting programs also need to be able to manipulate
lists with elements from other types — lists of booleans, lists of
lists, etc.  We _could_ just define a new inductive datatype for each
of these, for example

```
data BoolList : Set where
  []bool : BoolList
  _∷bool_ : Bool → BoolList → BoolList
```

But this would quickly become tedious, partly because we have to make
up different constructor names for each datatype, but mostly because
we would also need to define new versions of all our list manipulating
functions (`length`, `rev`, etc.) for each new datatype definition.

To avoid all this repetition, Agda supports _polymorphic_ inductive
type definitions.  Single-type lists like `NatList` or `BoolList` are
*monomorphic*, literally meaning that they have one form.  A
polyporphic datatype can be applied to different elements types — it
has *many* forms, not just one.  For example, here is a first version
of a _polymorphic list_ datatype.

```
module Poly1 where
  data List : Set → Set where
    [] : (x : Set) → List x
    cons : (x : Set) → x → List x → List x
```

This is just like the definition of `NatList` from the previous
section, except that the `ℕ` argument to the cons constructor has been
replaced by an arbitrary type `x`, a binding for `x` has been added to
the function header on the first line, and the occurrences of
`NatList` in the types of the constructors have been replaced by
`List x`.

We will improve this datatype shortly, so we have wrapped this first
draft in its own local `module` declaration.  This way, we can reuse
the same names in other modules, and avoid having to write
`++version2` or similar silliness.  Notice that all of the datatype
and function definitions are indented within this module — Agda uses
the indentation to work out which definitions are part of this local
module, and where the module ends.

What sort of thing is `List` itself?  A good way to think about it is
that the definition of `List` is a _function_ from one datatype to
another, inductively-defined datatype.  In other words, `List` is a
function from one type to another.  For any particular type `x`, the
type `List x` is the inductively defined set of lists whose elements
are of type `x`.

#### Exercise `typelist1` (starting) {#typelist1}

Use `C-c C-d` to verify that `List` (or since we have defined it
within a local module, `Poly1.List`) has type `Set → Set`.

The parameter `x` in this version of `List` automatically becomes a
parameter to the constructors `[]` and `cons` — that is, `[]` and
`cons` are now polymorphic constructors; when we use them, we must now
provide a first argument that is the type of the List they are
building. For example, `[] ℕ` constructs the empty List of type
`ℕ`.

#### Exercise `typenil1` (starting) {#typenil1}

Use `C-c C-d` to verify that

 - `Poly1.[] ℕ` has type `Poly1.List ℕ`.
 - `Poly1.cons ℕ 3 (Poly1.[] ℕ)` has type `Poly1.List ℕ`.

### Quantification for type arguments

In our first version of polymorphic lists, the type of the elements of
the list was an argument to both the type name `List`, and to its two
constructors.  It is more common to structure generic types to use
*quantification* for the type argument in the constructors:

```
data List : Set → Set where
  [] : ∀ {A : Set} → List A
  _∷_ : ∀ {A : Set} → A → List A → List A

infixr 5 _∷_
```

The symbol ∀ is pronounced "for all."  There is a sense in which these
constructors are equivalent to our earlier ones, but there are
advantages to using quantification for constructors and functions.  In
particular, we are asking Agda to infer the arguments of a type
automatically by writing them in curly braces `{` and `}` instead of
parentheses `(` and `)`.

For both of these constructors, `A` becomes an *implicit* type
argument.  Now when we write a list of natural numbers, we do not need
to write the type argument with every name use.  For example, you can
use `C-c C-d` to check that

    1 ∷ 2 ∷ 3 ∷ []

is a well-typed expression, with type `List ℕ`.

What is the type of `[]`?  `C-c C-d` gives us a cryptic result:

    List _x_17

(Your system may show you a different number than 17 — which is fine.)
Clearly, and unsurprisingly, it is a `List`.  But what is this type
`_x_17` for the elements?  We have asked Agda to work out the element
type for `[]` itself, but when we describe the empty list there are no
elements from which Agda can work out the right type!  So Agda uses
`_x_17` as a placeholder, unless and until a particular use allows it
to figure out a more specific type.

But we can be more specific about the element type if we want for this
empty list.  We can pass an *explicit* type to `[]` or `_∷_` by
enclosing the type argment is curly braces.  So

 - `[] {ℕ}` has the type `List ℕ`
 - `[] {Bool}` has the type `List Bool`

even though there are no other elements of the list to require these
specific element types.

Note that although our construction of `List` does allow lists with
different element types, for any single list the element type **must
be consistent**.  We can describe a list of numbers, a list of boolean
values, a list of pairs where each pair contains one number and one
boolean.  But we **cannot** describe a list which contains both
numbers and booleans.  If we try, Agda gives us an error.  For
example, we get an error if we evaluate or typecheck this expression:

    1 ∷ true ∷ []

The type of `_∷_` states that its left element has the same type as
the elements of the list it should expect for its right element.  So
when Agda sees a list which begins

    1 ∷

since `1` has type `ℕ`, Agda expects that the expression which follows
the `∷` should have type `List ℕ`.  But `true ∷ []` does not have
this type, and the evaluator reports an error.

Including the pragma:

    {-# BUILTIN LIST List #-}

tells Agda that the type `List` corresponds to the Haskell type
list, and the constructors `[]` and `_∷_` correspond to nil and
cons respectively, allowing a more efficient representation of lists.

The following defiition of `List` is equivalent to the one above:

    data List (x : Set) : Set where
      [] : List x
      _∷_ : x → List x → List x

When we move the argument declaration `(x : Set)` to the left side of
the colon `:`, Agda knows that it should be implicitly quantified for
each of the constructors.

### Polymorphic list functions

We can now define polymorphic versions of the functions we've already
seen for `NatList`.  Like the constructors for polymorphic `List`,
each of these functions will be quantified over the type of the
elements of the list.

Our monomorphic version of the `repeat` function took a **number** `n`
and a `count` of how many times `n` should be repeated in the result
list.  In our polymorphic version, we quantify over an element type
`x`, and the first explicit value argument of `repeat` is some value
of type `x`:

```
repeat : ∀ {x : Set} → x → ℕ → List x
repeat _ 0 = []
repeat x (suc n) = x ∷ repeat x n

_ : repeat 5 2 ≡ 5 ∷ 5 ∷ []
_ = refl

_ : repeat true 4 ≡ true ∷ true ∷ true ∷ true ∷ []
_ = refl
```

As with `[]` we can make the type argument explicit if we wish:

    repeat {ℕ} 5 2
    repeat {Bool} true 4

but we must use the curly braces to make the implicit argument
explicit, and we must make sure that the type and value arguments are
all consistent together.

You should try to find a balance in your own code between too many
type annotations (which can clutter and distract) and too few (which
can sometimes require readers to perform complex type inference in
their heads in order to understand your code).

#### Exercise `mumblegrumble` (starting) {#mumblegrumble}

Consider the following two inductively defined types.

```
module MumbleGrumble where

  data mumble : Set where
    a : mumble
    b : mumble → ℕ → mumble
    c : mumble

  data grumble : Set → Set where
    d : ∀ {x : Set} → mumble → grumble x
    e : ∀ {x : Set} → grumble x
```

Which of the following are well-typed elements of `grumble x` for some
type `x`?  Try to answer without using `C-c C-d` or `C-c C-l` before
checking your answer.

 - `d (b a 5)`
 - `d mumble (b a 5)`
 - `d bool (b a 5)`
 - `e bool true`
 - `e mumble (b c 0)`
 - `e bool (b c 0)`
 - `c`

#### Exercise `polyListTypes` (practice) {#polyListTypes}

Which of these expressions are well-typed?  What type do those
expressions have?  Why are the ill-typed expression not well-typed?

    'a' ∷ 'b' ∷ 'c'
    1 ∷ 'b' ∷ false ∷ []
    'a' ∷ 'b' ∷ 'c' ∷ []
    'a' ∷ 'b' ∷ 'c' ∷ 1

#### Exercise `genericlength` (practice) {#genericlength}

Write a polymorphic version of `length`:

    length : ∀ {x} → List x → ℕ
    -- Your clauses go here

    _ : length (true ∷ []) ≡ 1
    _ = refl

    _ : length (2 ∷ 4 ∷ 6 ∷ []) ≡ 3
    _ = refl

#### Exercise `genericappend` (practice) {#genericappend}

Write a polymorphic function `_++_` for appending two lists:

    infixr 5 _++_
    _++_ : ∀ {x : Set} → List x → List x → List x
    -- Your clauses go here

    _ : [] ++ (1 ∷ []) ≡ 1 ∷ []
    _ = refl

    _ : (2 ∷ 4 ∷ 6 ∷ []) ++ (8 ∷ 10 ∷ []) ≡ (2 ∷ 4 ∷ 6 ∷ 8 ∷ 10 ∷ [])
    _ = refl

#### Exercise `genericreverse` (practice) {#genericreverse}

    reverse : ∀ (x : Set) → List x → List x
    -- Your clauses go here

    _ : rev (1 ∷ []) ≡ 1 ∷ []
    _ = refl

    _ : rev (10 ∷ 20 ∷ 30 ∷ []) ≡ (30 ∷ 20 ∷ 10 ∷ [])
    _ = refl

#### Strings as lists of characters

The `Data.String` module in the standard library defines two functions
`toList` and `fromList` which allow a string to be converted to or
from a list of characters.  These exercises ask you to use these
functions, together with operations on the resulting lists.  For some
if these exercises, the character-manipulating functions of module
`Data.Char` will be helpful.

##### Exercise `capitalize` (practice) {#capitalize}

Write a function `capitalize` which converts all lower-case letters in
its argument to upper-case letters, and leaves other characters
unchanged.

    capitalize : String → String
    capitalize s = ?

    _ : capitalize "" ≡ ""
    _ = refl

    _ : capitalize "hello3" ≡ "HELLO3"
    _ = refl
 
##### Exercise `capitalizeOnly` (practice) {#capitalizeOnly}

Write a function `capitalizeOnly` which converts all lower-case
letters in its argument to upper-case letters, leaves upper-case
letters alone, and removes other characters from the result.

    capitalizeOnly : String → String
    capitalizeOnly s = ?

    _ : capitalizeOnly "" ≡ ""
    _ = refl

    _ : capitalizeOnly "hello3" ≡ "HELLO"
    _ = refl

##### Exercise `mangle` (practice) {#mangle}

Write a function `mangle` whose result removes the first character of
a word, and attaches it at the end.  If the argument is empty,
`mangle` should simply return an empty string.

    mangle : String → String
    mangle s = ?

    _ : mangle "" ≡ ""
    _ = refl

    _ : mangle "B" ≡ "B"
    _ = refl

    _ : mangle "ok" ≡ "ko"
    _ = refl

    _ : mangle "hello" ≡ "elloh"
    _ = refl

#### Exercise `matches` (practice) {#matches}

Write a function `matches` which takes two arguments,

 - A number, and
 - A list of numbers

and removes all occurrences of its first argument from its second
argument.

    matches : String → String
    matches s = ?

    _ : matches 10 (1 ∷ 10 ∷ 2 ∷ 10 ∷ 3 ∷ 10 ∷ 4 ∷ []) ≡ 1 ∷ 2 ∷ 3 ∷ 4 ∷ []
    _ = refl

    _ : matches 6 [] ≡ []
    _ = refl

    _ : matches 5 (20 ∷ 21 ∷ 22 ∷ []) ≡ 20 ∷ 21 ∷ 22 ∷ []
    _ = refl

## Polymorphic pairs

Following the same pattern, the definition for pairs of numbers that
we gave in the last section can be generalized to _polymorphic pairs_,
often called _products_.

```
data Prod (A B : Set) : Set where
  pair : A → B → Prod A B
```

As with lists, we make the type arguments of the constructor implicit
and define the familiar concrete notation.  Where our `List` type
takes only a single type argument, `Prod` takes two type arguments
which in the definition we name `A` and `B`.  Unlike with a list, the
left- and right-hand elements of a pair do not need to be of the same
type.  For example, we could have a pair of one natural number and one
boolean value.

```
twentyTwoTrue : Prod ℕ Bool
twentyTwoTrue = pair 22 true
```

It is straightforward to adapt the functions for extracting the pair
components:

```
fst : ∀ {A B : Set} → Prod A B → A
fst (pair x y) = x

snd : ∀ {A B : Set} → Prod A B → B
snd (pair x y) = y
```

We can also adapt our function for swapping the two elements of a
pair, but note that the swap must now be reflected in the types of the
argument and result.

```
swapPair : ∀ {A B : Set} → Prod A B → Prod B A
swapPair (pair x y) = pair y x
```

#### Exercise `explaincombine` (practice) {#explaincombine}

What does this function do?  Write tests for distinct key cases of its
behavior.

```
combine :  ∀ {A B : Set} → List A → List B → List (Prod A B)
combine [] _ = []
combine _ [] = []
combine (x ∷ xs) (y ∷ ys) = pair x y ∷ combine xs ys
```

#### Exercise `split` (practice) {#split}

The function `split` is the right inverse of `combine`: it takes a
List of pairs and returns a pair of lists.  In many functional
languages, it is called `unzip`.  Fill in the definition of `split`
below.  Make sure it passes the given test.

    split : ∀ {A B : Set} → List (Prod A B) → Prod (List A) (List B)
    -- Your clauses go here

    _ : split ((pair 1 false) ∷ (pair 2 false) ∷ [])
          ≡ pair (1 ∷ 2 ∷ []) (false ∷ false ∷ [])
    _ = refl

#### Exercise `typesFunctions` (practice) {#typesFunctions}

Write Agda definitions which have the following types:

 - `List (Pair ℕ)`
 - `ℕ → ℕ → Bool → ℕ`
 - `Char → Pair Char Char`

#### Exercise `splitList` (practice) {#splitList}

A different notion of splitting is to just cut a list into two parts.
Write a function `splitList` which takes a number and a list, and
returns a pair of lists.  Appending the two elements of the pair
should return the original list, and the first list of the pair should
have length equal to the number argument.  If the number argument is
larger than the length of the list argument, then the first element of
the pair should be the original list, and the second element should be
empty.

    splitList : ∀ {E : Set} → ℕ → List E → Prod (List E) (List E)
    -- Your definition goes here

    _ : splitList 1 (1 ∷ 2 ∷ 3 ∷ 1 ∷ []) ≡ pair (1 ∷ []) (2 ∷ 3 ∷ 1 ∷ [])
    _ = refl

    _ : splitList 3 (1 ∷ 2 ∷ 3 ∷ 1 ∷ []) ≡ pair (1 ∷ 2 ∷ 3 ∷ []) (1 ∷ [])
    _ = refl

    _ : splitList 0 (1 ∷ 2 ∷ 3 ∷ 1 ∷ []) ≡ pair [] (1 ∷ 2 ∷ 3 ∷ 1 ∷ [])
    _ = refl

    _ : splitList 9 (1 ∷ 2 ∷ 3 ∷ 1 ∷ []) ≡ pair (1 ∷ 2 ∷ 3 ∷ 1 ∷ []) []
    _ = refl

    _ : splitList 3 [] ≡ pair [] []
    _ = refl

#### Exercise `lengthEncode` (practice) {#lengthEncode}

Write a function `lengthEncode` which converts a string into a list of
pairs, each pair having a character and a number.  The series of
characters should be the same as the characters of the string, but
with consecutive duplicates removed.  The number should be the length
of that substring of that character only.

    lengthEncode : String → List (Prod Char ℕ)
    -- Your definition goes here

    _ : lengthEncode "hello" = (pair 'h' 1) ∷ (pair 'e' 1) :: (pair 'l' 2) ∷ (pair 'o' 1) ∷ []
    _ = refl

#### Exercise `lengthDecode` (practice) {#lengthDecode}

Write a function `lengthDecode` which is the inverse of
`lengthEncode`.

    lengthDecode : List (Prod Char ℕ) → String
    -- Your definition goes here

    _ : lengthDecode (pair 'h' 1) ∷ (pair 'e' 1) :: (pair 'l' 2) ∷ (pair 'o' 1) ∷ [] = "hello"
    _ = refl

## Polymorphic options

Our third polymorphic type generalizes the `NatMaybe` type into a
wrapper for either zero or one values of an element type.

```
data Maybe (A : Set) : Set where
  nothing : Maybe A
  just : A → Maybe A
```

We can now rewrite the `nthError` function so that it works with any
type of lists.

```
nthError : ∀ {X : Set} → List X → ℕ → Maybe X
nthError [] _ = nothing
nthError (x ∷ _) 0 = just x
nthError (x ∷ xs) (suc n) = nthError xs n

_ : nthError (4 ∷ 5 ∷ 6 ∷ 7 ∷ []) 0 ≡ just 4
_ = refl

_ : nthError (1 ∷ 2 ∷ []) 1 ≡ just 2
_ = refl

_ : nthError (1 ∷ 2 ∷ []) 2 ≡ nothing
_ = refl

_ : nthError ([] {ℕ}) 0 ≡ nothing
_ = refl
```

#### Exercise `hdErrorPoly` (practice) {#hdErrorPoly}

Complete the definition of a polymorphic version of the `hdError`
function making sure as usual that it passes its tests.

    hdError : ∀ {X : Type} → List X → Maybe X
    -- Your definition goes here

    _ : hdError (1 ∷ 2 ∷ []) = just 1
    _ = refl

    _ : hdError [] = nothing
    _ = refl

#### Exercise `lastItem` (practice) {#lastItem}

Write a function `lastItem` which returns the last element of a list,
if one exists.

    lastItem : ∀ {X : Type} → List X → Maybe X
    -- Your definition goes here

    _ : lastItem (10 ∷ 9 ∷ 8 ∷ []) = just 8
    _ = refl

    _ : lastItem (1 ∷ 2 ∷ []) = just 2
    _ = refl

    _ : lastItem [] = nothing
    _ = refl

#### Exercise `lastButOne` (practice) {#lastButOne}

Write a function `lastButOne` which returns the last element of a list,
if one exists.

    lastButOne : ∀ {X : Type} → List X → Maybe X
    -- Your definition goes here

    _ : lastButOne (11 ∷ 10 ∷ 9 ∷ 8 ∷ []) = just 9
    _ = refl

    _ : lastButOne (1 ∷ 2 ∷ []) = just 1
    _ = refl

    _ : lastButOne (1 ∷ []) = nothing
    _ = refl

    _ : lastButOne [] = nothing
    _ = refl

## Unicode

This section uses the following Unicode symbols:

    →  U+2192  RIGHTWARDS ARROW (\to, \r, \->)
    ∀  U+2200  FOR ALL  (\all)
    ∷  U+2237  PROPORTION  (\::)
    ≡  U+2261  IDENTICAL TO (\==)

---

*This page is derived from Pierce et al.  Exercises ##### Exercise
`capitalize`, `capitalizeOnly`, and `matches` are adapted from
Thompson.  For more information see the
[sources and authorship]({{ site.baseurl }}/Sources/) page.*
